Tracking Firm Use of AI in Real Time: A Snapshot from the Business Trends and 
Outlook Survey 

by 

Kathryn Bonney 
U.S. Census Bureau 

Cory Breaux 
U.S. Census Bureau 

Catherine Buffington 
U.S. Census Bureau 

Emin Dinlersoz 
U.S. Census Bureau 

Lucia Foster 
U.S. Census Bureau 

Nathan Goldschlag 
U.S. Census Bureau 

John Haltiwanger 
University of Maryland 

Zachary Kroff 
U.S. Census Bureau 

Keith Savage 
U.S. Census Bureau 

CES 24-16 

March 2024 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  research  program  of  the  Center  for  Economic  Studies  (CES)  produces  a  wide  range  of 
economic analyses to improve the statistical programs of the U.S. Census Bureau. Many of these 
analyses  take  the  form  of  CES  research  papers.  The  papers  have  not  undergone  the  review 
accorded Census Bureau publications and no endorsement should be inferred. Any opinions and 
conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of the 
U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is 
disclosed. Republication in whole or part must be cleared with the authors. 

To obtain information about the series, see www.census.gov/ces or contact Sean Wang, Editor, 
Discussion  Papers,  U.S.  Census  Bureau,  Center  for  Economic  Studies,  4600  Silver  Hill  Road, 
Washington, DC 20233, CES.Working.Papers@census.gov. To subscribe to the series, please click 
here. 

 
Abstract 

Timely  and  accurate  measurement  of  AI  use  by  firms  is  both  challenging  and  crucial  for 
understanding the impacts of AI on the U.S. economy. We provide new, real-time estimates of 
current and expected future use of AI for business purposes based on the Business Trends and 
Outlook Survey for September 2023 to February 2024. During this period, bi-weekly estimates of 
AI use rate rose from 3.7% to 5.4%, with an expected rate of about 6.6% by early Fall 2024. The 
fraction of workers at businesses that use AI is higher, especially for large businesses and in the 
Information sector. AI use is higher in large firms but the relationship between AI use and firm 
size is non-monotonic. In contrast, AI use is higher in young firms although, on an employment-
weighted basis, is U-shaped in firm age. Common uses of AI include marketing automation, virtual 
agents,  and  data/text  analytics.  AI  users  often  utilize  AI  to  substitute  for  worker  tasks  and 
equipment/software,  but  few  report  reductions  in  employment  due  to  AI  use.  Many  firms 
undergo  organizational  changes  to  accommodate  AI,  particularly  by  training  staff,  developing 
new  workflows,  and  purchasing  cloud  services/storage.  AI  users  also  exhibit  better  overall 
performance and higher incidence of employment expansion compared to other businesses. The 
most common reason for non-adoption is the inapplicability of AI to the business. 

1

0F

* Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the 
U.S. Census Bureau. The Census Bureau has reviewed this data product to ensure appropriate access, use, and 
disclosure avoidance protection of the confidential source data (Project No. P-7529868, Disclosure Review Board 
(DRB) approval numbers: CBDRB-FY23-0478, CBDRB-FY24-0162, and CBDRB-FY24-0225). We thank Joe Staudt and 
John Eltinge for helpful comments. John Haltiwanger was also a Schedule A employee of the Bureau of the Census 
at the time of the writing of this paper. 

 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction  

What effects Artificial Intelligence (AI) will have on the U.S. economy is a crucial question. 

Some expect AI to be transformative, especially given recent breakthroughs in Generative AI, 

leading to a sustained period of high productivity growth (Baily, Brynjolfsson, Korinek (2023)) 

while others are less optimistic about its impact (Gordon (2024)). AI development and use has 

been ongoing for several years and investigating the impact of AI on the economy is an active 

area of research. However, real time, comprehensive data on AI use by businesses has been 

limited. The most recent comprehensive studies of AI use, which rely on Annual Business 

Survey (ABS) data, report use during the 2016-18 period (Acemoglu et al. (2023, 2022) and a 

subset, 2017, in McElheran et al. (2024) and Zolas et al. (2020)), prior to the rapid recent 

developments of Generative AI.1 

Tracking AI use by firms in a timely fashion has become even more pressing given the recent 

advances in Generative AI. Some evidence suggests rapid adoption and usage of Generative AI. 

Press reports document that ChatGPT had more than 1 million users within 5 days of its release 

and 100 million users within weeks of its release (NYT, December 12, 2023). Recent reports 

suggest ChatGPT has about 180.5 million users as of March 2024.2 However, it remains unclear 

how many businesses are currently using AI. We fill this gap by using the real time Business 

Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS).  

The BTOS is an experimental data product intended to capture high-frequency changes in 

economic conditions through a qualitative survey representative of U.S. employer businesses.3 

The BTOS collection starting in September 2023, covering both single and multiple location 

businesses, included two new questions about the use of AI in the production of goods and 

services. These “core” AI questions are asked in reference to two time periods: current (previous 

1 The research using the ABS has its own advantages since it integrates the ABS with the Longitudinal Business 
Database (LBD) tracking firm dynamics and firm-level productivity data. Our contribution is real time information 
on AI use that is concurrent with the rapid advances in Generative AI. The LBD is currently only tracking firm 
dynamics through 2021. When the new vintages of LBD become available, we will also be able to combine them 
with BTOS to analyze the connection between AI use and firm dynamics. 
2 See https://explodingtopics.com/blog/chatgpt-users#how-many. 
3 See Buffington et al. (2023) for a description of the first survey year of the BTOS which covered only single 
location businesses. This paper focuses solely on the second survey year of the BTOS which covers single and 
multi-location businesses. Surveyed businesses are also asked about changes employment, input prices, and output 
prices (see Appendix A for the core BTOS questions). We take advantage of this information in our analysis. 

1 

 
 
two weeks) and six months in the future. Supplemental content was added to the BTOS from 

December 2023 to February 2024 to provide more detailed information about businesses’ use of 

AI. There are 13 questions in the supplement in addition to the two core AI questions (see 

Appendix B for the AI supplement). These questions ask about two time frames: the last six 

months and six months into the future. The supplement questions ask businesses about the type 

of AI used and applications to business functions, the impact of AI use on worker tasks and 

existing equipment, employment effects of AI, and other changes to the production process. A 

final question for those businesses who responded that they do not intend to use AI in the next 

six months concerns impediments to future use of AI. The data collection for the AI 

supplemental content stopped in February 2024, however the two core AI questions remain.  

The BTOS sample consists of approximately 1.2 million employer businesses over a given 

12-week period. Thus, each bi-weekly collection goes to a sample of about 200,000 businesses. 

The average biweekly response rate over the period of collection for AI-related core and 

supplement content is about 16%, resulting in a sample of about 164,500 businesses for our main 

analysis sample utilizing the supplement.  Following standard Census Bureau procedures, the 

sample is weighted so that estimates are representative at the national, state, sector and firm size 

level. We exploit this novel data to provide a real time assessment of AI use by U.S. businesses.4   

We find that the fraction of firms using AI is relatively low but rising: from about 3.7% at the 

start of the collection in September 2023 to about 5.4% at the end of February 2024. AI use is 

expected to rise further to about 6.6% by Fall 2024.  There is enormous variation in current use 

by sector from a low of 1.4% in Construction and Agriculture to a high of 18.1% in Information. 

4 Dinlersoz, Dogan, and Zolas (2024) use a distinct approach to obtain timely information on the diffusion of AI by 
using high-frequency administrative data from Census Bureau’s Business Formation Statistics (BFS). Using the 
write-in information on the applications, they find that there has been a surge in new AI-related business 
applications and formations in recent years. Relatedly, using the BFS industry-level data Decker and Haltiwanger 
(2024) find that high-tech sectors (e.g., Information and Professional, Scientific and Technical) where AI businesses 
are classified have played a major role in the surge in new business formation from 2021-23.  However, the BFS 
does not provide estimates of AI use rates for the general population of firms. There are also efforts to report on AI 
use on a timely basis from unrepresentative samples (McKinsey (2023) or indirect measures such as online resumes 
and job postings (for example, Babina et al. (2024)) or patenting behavior (for example, Miric et al. 2023)). All of 
these approaches have yielded valuable insights, but the BTOS has the advantage of being a large, nationally 
representative survey of U.S. businesses directly asking about AI use for business purposes. 

2 

 
 
Future expected use exhibits similar variation with a low of 1.5% in Agriculture and 21.5% in 

Information.   

 Firm-level use rates mask the fact that a larger fraction of workers are employed at 

businesses that are using AI. This finding reflects that larger businesses are more likely to use 

AI. For example, among firms with at least 250 employees, about 7% of firms and about 9% of 

workers are in firms that use AI. This gap between firm and employment-weighted use rates also 

varies by sector—about 1.9% of workers in Construction and about 22.3% of employees in the 

Information sector are at firms using AI.   For these same sectors, expected future rates by Fall 

2024 on an employment-weighted basis are 3.2% and 25.2% respectively.   

While there is an overall positive relationship between AI use and firm size, the relationship 

is U-shaped.  The smallest firms (1–4 employees) have higher AI use than firms in the 5–99 

employee range. Firms with 250 or more employees have the highest fraction of AI use. 

Relatedly but distinctly, we find AI use declines with firm age.  However, on an employment-

weighted basis, there is a U-shaped relationship between AI use and firm age.  That is, youngest 

and oldest groups of firms having the most employees exposed to AI use.  

Looking deeper, we see that businesses that use AI typically utilize it for marketing 

automation, virtual agents and chatbots, natural language processing and data/text analytics. On 

an employment-weighted basis, the primary focus shifts to data analytics. In all cases, AI using 

firms have clearer perspectives on specific business applications in the future compared to the 

current use. A substantial fraction of AI users indicate that they use it to substitute for worker 

tasks and for equipment/software operations. However, relatively few AI users indicate they 

reduce employment due to AI use. Many AI users implement organizational changes—including 

a high propensity to train existing staff to use AI.  For those businesses that do not intend to use 

AI in the near future, the most cited reason is that AI is not applicable for their business.      

There are many challenges in measuring AI business use that need to be recognized in 

interpreting our findings. Firms may use AI in incidentally or insignificant ways, and not report 

such use, as AI may not be a part of their core processes or products. Others may rely on AI 

embedded in systems or services provided by third parties; in which case they are unknowing 

users of AI. The estimates produced from business responses to the BTOS may not include these 

incidental and/or embedded uses of AI. Still, we think that the BTOS statistics are highly 

3 

 
relevant as they arguably reflect more direct and significant use of AI for business purposes. 

Given the explosion of interest about Generative AI transforming the economy, the tracking of 

such significant use is important.  

Interestingly, the patterns we have detected from September 2023 to February 2024 are 

broadly consistent with the results from the two complementary collections of the ABS covering 

the period 2016–2018 (see Acemoglu et al. (2023, 2022) and 2017 in McElheran et al. (2024) 

and Zolas et al. (2020)). 5   AI use rates are relatively low over this period but higher on an 

employment-weighted basis. They are much higher in sectors such as the Information sector. 

While more analysis is needed, the rapid developments in Generative AI have not yet led to an 

explosion of AI use among businesses between September 2023 and February 2024.   Still, we 

do find that AI use for business purposes is substantially higher (when adjustments are made for 

comparable tabulations) in our sample period compared to the ABS sample periods pre-2019.   

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section we describe the design and 

testing of AI questions. In section 3, we provided results from the core AI questions and compare 

these results to adoption rates from other surveys. In section 4, we provide results from the AI 

Supplement. We bring in other data from the BTOS in section 5, where we examine relationships 

between AI adoption and firm performance (and compare these to results from ABS). Finally, in 

section 6 we provide our conclusions and a discussion about future research.  

2.  Design and Testing of AI Questions 

As denoted by its name, the BTOS provides almost real-time information on current trends 

and future outlook for businesses. BTOS provides a more qualitative view of the economy with 

questions concerning changes and movements in terms of improving or worsening conditions. 

With its biweekly collection period, the questions asked of respondents must be answerable in a 

timely fashion. The dissemination platform needs to be agile enough to handle almost continuous 

5 Caution is required in comparing AI use rates from BTOS to those reported from the ABS in the 2016-18 period in 
Acemoglu et al. (2023, 2022) and 2017 in McElheran et al. (2024) and Zolas et al. (2020).  In the latter papers, AI 
use statistics are based on the fraction of AI users over all businesses excluding those that answered “Do Not 
Know”.  In the current paper, we include “Do Not Know” in our baseline statistics.  We discuss why and also make 
comparisons to ABS statistics by excluding “Do Not Know” in section 3.c below.  When comparisons are made on 
an “apples-to-apples” basis we find substantially higher AI use rates in 2023-24 from BTOS compared to the 2016-
18 period from ABS. 

4 

 
 
 
 
updates of results. Finally, BTOS is designed to handle changes in content in a relatively 

streamlined fashion while still striving to adhere to Census Bureau quality standards. We 

describe how the BTOS sample, methodology, content review, and dissemination platform work 

to meet these goals.  

a.  Sample and Methodology 

The BTOS sample of about 1.2 million businesses is drawn annually from the Business 

Register. Beginning in September 2023, the sample covers all nonfarm, private employer 

businesses and produces data representative at the national, state, and sector levels in addition to 

the 25 largest metropolitan statistical areas6; each representative panel includes approximately 

200,000 businesses -- the average biweekly response rate over the period of collection for AI-

related content so far is about 16%, resulting in about 164,500 businesses for our main analysis 

sample. The BTOS rotates across these six panels over the year so that businesses in each panel 

are asked to report once every 12 weeks for the BTOS cycle.7  The first time each biweekly 

panel is in sample, businesses are contacted either by email or letter with an invitation to respond 

to the survey. Starting with the second time each biweekly panel is in sample, businesses are 

contacted only by email with an invitation to respond to the survey. Survey responses and 

nonresponse-adjusted survey weights are used to create estimates of the percent of businesses 

responding to each question response. The weights make the estimates representative at the 

national level and by state, sector and size. Unlike many other Census Bureau surveys large 

businesses are not selected for sampling with higher probability than smaller businesses. 

The BTOS published statistics include estimates by geography and NAICS sectors, but also 

for an unclassified geography and NAICS sector. Multiple location businesses operating in more 

than one state (or MSA) are considered unclassified for geography and are not included in any 

state (or MSA) total. Similarly, multiple location businesses operating in more than one sector 

are considered unclassified for sector and are not included in any sector total. These exclusions 

from detailed totals are done to prevent double counting. Businesses assigned as unclassified, for 

6 See the published BTOS Methodology for additional details: https://www.census.gov/hfp/btos/methodology. 
7 The BTOS rotates these six panels (a “cycle”) four times for a total of 48 weeks of survey coverage. Some panels 
will be surveyed five times instead of four to cover the remaining weeks of the survey year. 

5 

 
 
geography and/or sector, are included in national totals including by firm characteristics such as 

firm age and size.8  

b.  Core Content 

In terms of content, businesses are asked about changes or movements in terms of actual and 

anticipated increases or decreases for concepts of interest including employment, input prices, 

and output prices (see Appendix A for the core BTOS questions). These are asked in reference to 

two time periods: current and six months in the future. In a parallel fashion, there are two core AI 

questions about the use of AI in the production of goods and services in the current time period 

and six months in the future. The questions ask: “Between MMM DD – MMM DD, did this 

business use Artificial Intelligence (AI) in producing goods or services? (Examples of AI: 

machine learning, natural language processing, virtual agents, voice recognition, etc.)” and 

“During the next six months, do you think this business will be using Artificial Intelligence (AI) 

in producing goods or services? (Examples of AI: machine learning, natural language processing, 

virtual agents, voice recognition, etc.)”. 

The additional AI content (both the two core questions as well as the 13 supplemental 

questions) were tested separately in summer 2023. 9 Most respondents understood the AI 

8 The decision to create unclassified geography and sector classifications for estimation was made after careful 
consideration of alternate methods as well as extensive cognitive interviews conducted in the field of large, complex 
businesses. The BTOS relies heavily on business email addresses for survey respondent contact; these addresses are 
nearly always reported at the company level given the source of these data are other responses to Census Bureau 
business surveys. Cognitive interviews were used in part to determine if companies would be willing to provide 
establishment level contact information as part of a two stage survey process. Companies reported that not only 
would providing establishment-level contact email addresses be burdensome (extremely so for very large 
businesses), but it would also be something they were unwilling to do. Without a source of establishment-level 
contacts, the BTOS is currently limited to surveying at the company level. The decision to use unclassified 
categories for estimates was made in order to increase the representativeness of the national estimates produced by 
the survey by including multiple location businesses while making minimal assumptions about how to allocate these 
multiple location business responses across geography and sectors. As BTOS is an experimental product, the Census 
Bureau may revisit the choice to use these unclassified estimates in the future. 
9 With limited exceptions, Census Bureau survey questions undergo pretesting using cognitive interviews and/or 
unmoderated tests to fulfill the Census Bureau’s Statistical Quality Standard A2-3.3 . The standard states data 
collection instruments and supporting materials must be pretested with respondents to identify problems (e.g., 
problems related to content, order/context effects, skip instructions, formatting, navigation, and edits) and then 
refined, prior to implementation, based on the pretesting results. Typically, two rounds of testing are used, the first 
to identify issues and the second to confirm that earlier identified issues have been resolved. The main two topics 
evaluated during cognitive testing are content quality and respondent burden. Most core content found in Appendix 
A was tested in early 2022 prior to the launch of the BTOS in July 2022. General findings from this study included 
that respondents had no difficulty answering questions looking back in time nor in the future, that six months was a 
reasonable amount of time looking forward, and that some respondents expressed had concerns about seasonality for 

6 

 
 
 
questions and were able answer them. Challenges presented during cognitive testing included 

whether the respondent was knowledgeable about the current or planned use of AI or the reasons 

why the company was not using AI. Some respondents had a role in the company financials or 

accounting and/or were unfamiliar with the technical plans for the company. Testing supported 

that in these situations respondents would select the correct response option “do not know”. The 

most common challenge presented during cognitive testing surrounded the definition of and what 

qualifies as AI. To assist respondents,  the BTOS includes hyperlinks on each AI question within 

the online instrument to the previously tested ABS survey definition.10   

We include the “do not know” cases in our analysis of AI use rates given the current versus 

future perspective of BTOS. It may be for example that a firm is planning on using AI in the 

future for business purposes but there is uncertainty about whether some AI use has commenced 

already. That is, as we will see there are interesting transitions from “do not know” in the current 

period to “Yes” in the future.  

c.  Supplement Content 

A supplement to the BTOS was added in December 2023 covering six biweekly periods 

‘cycle’ to dive deeper into AI usage. Altogether, 13 additional questions were added, but some 

are only applicable conditional on AI use. The supplement focused broadly on understanding the 

types of AI technologies and applications used by businesses, task, labor, and capital augmenting 

versus replacing roles/effects of AI, organizational changes made to accommodate AI, and the 

reasons for businesses not adopting or using AI. We next describe these questions (and provide 

the exact questions in Appendix B).  

One of the  challenges revealed by cognitive testing was having a common understanding of 

a cutting-edge technology (see Miric et al. (2023) for a similar discussion). Thus, the first 

certain questions looking six months forward (e.g., in sectors that experience seasonal changes in hours or 
employment). Study authors also noted that it was important to be consistent in framing forward looking questions 
depending on whether the concept being measured takes place over the span of six months or is a point estimate for 
six months in the future. 
10 “Artificial Intelligence is computer systems and software that are able to perform tasks normally requiring human 
intelligence, such as decision-making, visual perception, speech recognition, and language processing. 
Types or applications of AI include machine learning, natural language processing, virtual agents, predictive 
analytics, machine vision, voice recognition, decision making systems, data analytics, text analytics, image 
processing, etc.” 

7 

 
 
 
supplemental question attempts to cast a wide net in determining AI use by providing 17 detailed 

examples that respondents can check in response to the question “In the last six months, what 

types of applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) did this business use in producing goods or 

services?” The examples are intended to capture the scope of AI usage and the differences in 

terminology used. Thus, it includes overlapping concepts such as “deep learning” and “machine 

learning.” Given the rapidly expanding technology, we also include “Other” as an option.  

If the respondent picks any of these 18 options, they are then asked five follow-up questions. 

Many of these questions focus on the impact on workers: whether AI is used to perform tasks 

previously done by employees in producing goods and services, and if so, the intensity of this 

use (number of tasks: “small,” “moderate,” or “large”) and whether the use of AI has changed 

the total employment at the business (increased, decreased, no change). Since adopting AI may 

also impact capital/equipment, the respondents are further asked whether AI has replaced 

operations performed by existing equipment/software. The final retrospective question asks 

about other changes needed in order for the business to use AI. There are 7 options that focus on 

changes in staffing, equipment, and processes and an option for “Other” and “None.” These 

questions provide guidance regarding the complements to AI adoption.  

BTOS then asks the same series of questions but with a forward-looking time frame of 

during the next six months. The AI supplement ends with a question for those respondents who 

noted that they do not expect to use AI in the next six months. The question is intended to help 

us understand why businesses have not adopted AI. It asks for reasons why the business does not 

plan to use AI during the next six months and provides 10 possible reasons and then “Other.” 

The ten possible reasons include constraints due to costs, skilled workforce, data available, or 

laws/regulations; concerns about privacy/security or bias; issues with AI technology not being 

sufficiently mature or having not met expectation; and either not knowing about the capabilities 

of AI or whether it is applicable to the business.  

3.  AI Use Rates  

We first consider the overall current and future use rates of AI by firms estimated from 

BTOS and compare these rates with those estimated from other recent surveys. 

8 

 
 
a.  AI Use Rates in the BTOS 

The first collection period of the core questions in September 2023 yielded an AI usage rate 

of 3.7% across firms. That is, an estimated 3.7% of firms nationally used AI in the previous two 

weeks in producing goods or services. Over the following 11 two-week collection periods, the AI 

usage rate has grown to 5.4% in February 2024. This represents a 46% growth in the number of 

firms using AI over 5 months. To abstract away from the variation in sampling error inherent in 

bi-weekly measurements, Figure 1 shows the linear trend fitted through the use rates observed in 

all 12 bi-weekly periods of collection. The linear trend indicates a clear rise in current AI use 

during this time period.  In contrast, the linear trend for future use has a slight upward trend 

reflecting the within sample increase from 6.3% in September 2023 to 6.6% in February 2024  

(where the latter reflects expectations for early Fall 2024).    Conceptually, we would expect 

current and future use rates to eventually converge.  If we combine the current use in Fall 2023 

of 3.7% with the expected use of 6.6% in Fall 2024, this represents rapid growth in AI use over 

the year combining actual and expected growth. It will be possible to confirm whether such 

expectations are realized in the near future using future BTOS collections.   

Employment-weighted use rates in Figure 1 show similar trends with higher levels. The share 

of employment in firms indicating current use grew from about 4.5% to nearly 9% over the 

sample period. Employment-weighted expected future rates increase from about 10% to 12% 

during the same period.  The employment-weighted use rates provide information on the fraction 

of workers at firms using AI—a rough measure of worker exposure to AI.   

Figure 2a contains the current and expected rates of AI use by 2-digit NAICS sector.11 

Information (NAICS 51) and Professional, Scientific, and Technical services (NAICS 54) sectors 

have the highest rates of current and expected AI use. The sectors with the lowest rates of current 

and expected AI use are Construction (NAICS 23) and Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and 

Hunting (NAICS 11). All sectors had more firms indicating expected use than current use (with 

the exception of Management),12 but not all sectors have the same proportional expected 

increase. For example, AI use in Educational Services (NAICS 61), which has the third-highest 

11 Current AI use for utilities (NAICS 22) is not reported for confidentiality reasons. Firms with establishments in 
multiple sectors are tabulated in a separate unclassified group (see Section 2.a) and are labeled as “XX.” 
12 Estimates for the management sector (NAICS 55) also have particularly large standard errors of 2.4%–2.7% (no 
other sector has standard errors larger than 1%). 

9 

 
 
rate of current AI use at 9.1%, expects to rise 1 percentage point (pp) over six months. However, 

firms in Finance and Insurance (NAICS 52), which has a current AI usage rate of 6.9% (sixth-

highest among sectors), have expectations of a 48% increase (or 3.3pp increase) in AI use over 

six months. 

Figure 2b provides the employment-weighted estimates of AI use by 2-digit sector. The rank 

ordering is very similar to the firm-weighted statistics with the rates almost uniformly higher. 

For example, in terms of the fraction of firms, 18% of firms in the Information sector reported 

current use of AI, with 22% of workers at firms in the Information sector currently using AI. The 

future use differential between firm and employment weighted is similar, with 22% of firms in 

the Information sector anticipating using AI for producing goods or services and 25% of workers 

at firms in the Information sector anticipating using AI in the next 6 months. The lowest ranked 

sectors on an employment-weighted basis are Construction and Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and 

Gas extraction (NAICS 21)—only 1.9% of workers in these sectors are at firms using AI for 

producing goods or services.  

Figure 3a contains estimates of current and expected AI use rate by state, the District of 

Columbia, and Puerto Rico—see also the map in Figure 3c. The highest current AI usage rates 

are in Colorado, the District of Columbia, Florida, Utah, Nevada, and Delaware. In general, the 

states with the highest shares of firms with current AI use appear to be located in the West or 

Northeast regions of the U.S. Also in the top quartile are the firms unclassifiable by state because 

they operate in multiple states (labeled as “XX” in the figure)—notably, many large, multi-unit 

firms fall into this category. This category of firms has an especially large expected increase in 

AI use, second only to D.C. (despite having only the 11th-highest current rate of AI use). Firms in 

Mississippi and West Virginia have the lowest rates of current and expected AI use. 

Employment-weighted results in Figure 3b indicate more of a mixture of states from different 

regions, including the “XX” category which includes many large, multi-unit firms.  

Figure 4a shows the current and expected usage rates by firm size class. We find a U-shaped 

pattern with respect to size for both current and expected use, with higher rates of AI use in the 

smallest and the largest size classes than the middle size classes. Businesses in the largest size 

class (250+ employees) have the highest current and expected use rates; at 7.2% and 11.0%, 

respectively. Firms in the smallest size class (1–4 employees) have the next highest rate of 

10 

 
current AI use at 5.5%, and those with 100–249 employees use at a rate of 4.8%. Businesses in 

these two groups expect AI use rates of 7.0% and 7.8%, respectively. As discussed more in detail 

in Section 3c, the finding that the smallest firms have relatively higher rates of AI use differs 

from the patterns observed previously in the Annual Business Survey (ABS). Note, however, that 

the expected future use rates by firm size class also indicates that the AI use rate is generally 

expected to grow more (in percentage terms) for larger firm size classes than the smaller ones. 

For example, the use rate in the smallest size class (1-4 employees) is expected to grow by 27%, 

whereas the use rate in the largest class (250+ employees) is expected to increase by 53%. 

Nevertheless, the non-monotonic pattern across size classes is expected to prevail in the near 

future.  

Employment-weighted patterns by firm size are depicted in Figure 4b. The patterns are 

broadly similar to the firm-weighted statistics which is not surprising given that we are already 

using firm size as the key variable. However, there is a notable increase in current and expected 

use for the employment-weighted statistics for the 250+ firm size class. This implies that it is 

especially the largest firms in this size class with higher AI use rates.  

Figure 5a reports current and expected rates of AI use by firm age categories.13 Current use 

rate is the highest (7.1%) among the youngest group and lower for older groups, with the lowest 

rate (2.8%) observed in the oldest category. Expected future use rates are uniformly higher for 

each age category and exhibit a similar decline from the youngest to the oldest group (though the 

first two groups have similar rates). While the use rate is expected to grow for all age categories, 

the percent gap between expected future and current use rate increases monotonically with age 

category, from 28% for the youngest group to 52% for the oldest.14    

Employment-weighted use rates by firm age in Figure 5b show a similar pattern of decline 

with age group, with the exception of the oldest category. Among all age categories, the 

youngest has the largest share of employment in current users (6.3%) and expected future users 

13 Firm age is collected from the Longitudinal Business Database and captures the age of the oldest establishment 
when a firm identifier is first observed (Jarmin and Miranda 2002; Chow et al. 2021). Since the LBD is produced 
with a significant lag (the latest year available at the time of writing was 2021) we attempt to find firms in BTOS in 
the LBD from 2018 to 2021. Considering a window of LBD years accounts for reactivations. We then classify firms 
that appear in BTOS but not the LBD as part of the age 0 to 5 group since they are likely firms that enter after the 
last LBD year observed.  
14 It is important to note that firms naturally traverse the age groups over time. For this analysis, this implies that the 
firms that make up the youngest group in the future have not yet been born. 

11 

 
 
(10.0%). For the oldest, these figures are 5.5% and 10.2%, respectively – indicating an expected 

doubling of employment share of users in this age category in the near future. 

b.  Firm-level Current versus Expected Future Use 

An important question is how persistent AI use at the firm level is—will firms that currently 

use AI continue to do so in the future? Because AI is still an early technology, many firms may 

be testing the use of AI in various tasks and processes. De-adoption may occur if such 

experimentation does not yield anticipated benefits or organizational synergies. Equally 

important is the question of what share of the current non-users expect to use AI in the future, 

and whether this group of firms is systematically different (e.g., in scale) than current users.   

The cross tabulations showing the relationship between current and future use is presented in 

Table 1. Each cell in a panel gives the estimated share of firms with a given current use status 

(indicated by the rows) and an expected future use status (indicated by the columns). Panel A 

gives the unconditional fraction of firms in each cell, whereas panels B and C condition on 

current and expected future use, respectively.  

In Table 1 panel A we find evidence of persistent use and non-use, adoption, and significant 

uncertainty. We find 3.4% of the firms are persistent users, responding that they currently use AI 

and expect to continue to use in the future and 67.4% are non-users that expect to remain non-

users. Another 2.8% of firms are not using AI currently but plan to in the future and a small 

percent of firms (0.7%) currently use but do not expect to in the future. We also find substantial 

uncertainty in Panel A, with 14.0% of firms responding that they are current non-users but don’t 

know whether they will use AI in the future. Eight percent of firms don’t know whether they use 

AI currently or will use it in the future, and 2.5% don’t know whether they use currently and will 

not use in the future. Overall, a large fraction (22.9%) of firms don’t know whether they will use 

in the future, potentially indicating uncertainty about the net benefits of AI or potential issues 

about respondents’ information on the use of AI within their firms.15 

Panels B and C, which condition on current or future use, provide several key insights. In 

Panel B, which conditions on current use (rows sum to 100%), we find large diagonal elements 

15 This is particularly the case for large firms, based on the results of cognitive testing and similar issues encountered 
in the 2018 and 2019 ABS technology modules. 

12 

 
 
(in the range 68–80%), indicating that current use patterns at the firm level will largely persist 

over time. A large fraction of the firms (67.9%) that currently use AI also expect to use in the 

future. However, a non-trivial fraction (14.5%) of the current users do not expect to use in the 

future, and another 17.6% don’t know whether they will. Thus, about one in seven (and possibly 

more) of the current AI users may “de-adopt” in the future. 96.7% of current non-users either 

expect to stay non-users (80%) or don’t know if they will use in the future (16.7%). Similarly, 

96.9% of the firms in the current “don’t know” category do not expect to use (23%) or don’t 

know whether they will use (73.9%). 

Turning to panel C, which conditions on future use, we find that only half (52.0%) of the 

firms that expect to use AI in the future are accounted for by current users, whereas a large 

fraction (42.8%) will originate from current non-users. A relatively small share (5.2%) comes 

from the current “don’t know” group. A large fraction (95.5%) of future non-users originates 

from current non-users. The group of firms that do not know whether they will use AI in the 

future is mainly made up of current non-users (61.3%) and firms that do not know whether they 

currently use AI (34.9%).  

Employment-weighted results in Table 2, panel A indicate that about 4.8% of the total 

employment is in firms that are current and expected future users, whereas most of the total 

employment (50.8%) is in current non-users that expect to stay non-users in the future. Note also 

that a large fraction of employment (18.8%) is in firms that don’t know whether they use AI 

currently or will use in the future. As in the case of the firm-weighted results, the diagonal 

elements of the matrix conditional on current adoption in panel B are relatively high (around 66-

81%), indicating that a large fraction of employment in each current use status fall into that same 

status for future use status—again, indicating a large degree of persistence in the use status over 

time. However, about 34% of the employment in current users is in firms that do not expect to 

use or don’t know whether they will use in the future. Only 6.1% of the employment in current 

non-users is expected to be in the future user category.  

As shown in panel C, about 43% of the employment in firms that expect future use is 

accounted by current users, whereas the rest will come mostly from current non-users (38%) and 

about half as much (19%) from firms in the current “don’t know” category.  

13 

 
The average firm size (employment) in each cell is shown in Table 3. First, note that the 

average size of current users as a whole is much larger than that of current non-users (34 versus 

19 employees). However, firms in the current “don’t know” category is the largest on average 

(49). In particular, firms that are in the current “don’t know” category but expect to use AI in the 

future are the largest on average (150). This may in part reflect issues with responses in 

large/multi-unit firms or experimentation with AI.  

Firms that expect to use AI in the future are on average larger than the current users (40 

versus 34). The firms that are current non-users and expect to remain non-users are the smallest 

on average (18). As seen in Table 1, this group makes up the largest fraction of firms, and 

consists, on average, of smaller firms that do not use AI and are unlikely to adopt in the near 

future. More generally, firms that do not expect to use in the future are made up of smaller firms 

on average (18). Firms that are current non-users but expect to use in the future have roughly of 

similar size (36) on average as the current users (34). Note also that current users that do not 

expect to continue to use tend to be on average smaller (22) compared to the average user size. 

c.  Comparison with AI Use Rates in Other Surveys  

We start with a comparison to two waves of collections on the ABS. The ABS represents a 

joint partnership between the Census Bureau and the National Center for Science and 

Engineering Statistics (NCSES). The ABS is a firm-level survey that was sent to a nationally 

representative sample of approximately 850,000 private, non-farm employer firms in the 2018 

collection and approximately 300,000 firms for the 2019 collection. For both collections, the 

intent is to repeat the collections after about 3–4 years to learn more about adoption and diffusion 

and to potentially allow us to examine causality.  

In the research discussed below using the 2018 and 2019 waves of the ABS, “Do Not Know” 

cases were excluded from all calculations.  The motivation stemmed in part from AI being at 

earlier stage of development and also from evidence discussed in Zolas et al. (2020) that “Do 

Not Know” responses were skewed toward relatively larger firms.  This contrasts with the 

treatment of “Do Not Know” in the above analysis in the current paper discussed in prior 

sections.  Given these differences in methodology, we proceed as follows.  First, we discuss the 

research using the 2018 and 2019 waves of the ABS.  Second, we report statistics from the 

14 

 
BTOS that also exclude “Do Not Know” so that magnitudes across research papers are 

comparable.   

Working with Erik Brynjolfsson and Kristina McElheran, a technology module of three 

questions was designed for the 2018 ABS to capture the adoption and diffusion of five business 

technologies that can be associated with artificial intelligence (automated-guided vehicles, 

machine learning, machine vision, natural language processing, and voice recognition). It is 

important to note, however, that the 2018 ABS did not explicitly mention AI or relate these 

technologies to AI when asking about them. Therefore, some respondents may have reported use 

of these technologies without an AI component (e.g., some voice recognition and automated-

guided vehicles may not embed AI). Zolas et al. (2020) and McElheran et al. (2024) find that 

overall adoption of any of these five technologies was less than 6% around 2017. However, since 

adoption was skewed towards larger businesses, when weighted by employment, adoption was 

about 18%. Adoption also varied by sector of the economy with higher adoption rates (about 

12% each) in the Information and Manufacturing sectors. The probability of AI use was found to 

increase with firm size; and controlling for size and industry, younger firms were on average 

more likely to use AI. 

The 2019 ABS technology module focuses on automation and the impact on the workforce 

and was developed in collaboration with Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo. The module 

asked questions on various aspects of the use of five advanced technologies: artificial 

intelligence, robotics, dedicated equipment, specialized software, and cloud computing. In 

contrast to the 2018 ABS survey, some questions were directly aimed at AI, and a definition of 

artificial intelligence was also provided to the respondents. The AI use rate for the period 2016–

2018 was estimated at 3.2%, and 12.6% of U.S. workers were employed at firms using AI during 

this period—see Acemoglu et al. (2022). AI use was more prevalent in Information (9% of 

firms), Professional, Scientific and Technical services (7%), and Finance, Insurance and Real 

Estate sectors (5%). Conditional on industry, larger and younger firms were more likely to use 

AI. 

Turning back to the BTOS and excluding “Do Not Know” from the calculations, our findings 

are broadly consistent, qualitatively, with the patterns uncovered from the 2018 and 2019 ABS in 

terms of variation in AI use by firm characteristics. However, we observe a number of 

15 

 
differences as well. First, we find higher levels of AI use; the current rate of 6.0% at the end of 

our sample period (adjusted to exclude “do not know” responses) represents a near doubling 

from the 3.2% use rate in the 2019 ABS. In the BTOS, firms reported expectations to further 

increase AI use to 8.6% by the fall of 2024—again, adjusted to remove “do not know” responses.  

On an employment-weighted basis, when we exclude “do not know”,  the current use over 

September 2023 to February 2024 averages 9.4%. The future use in the next six months averages 

17.4%.   

Furthermore, we see a more prevalent use of AI by small firms in the BTOS compared to the 

earlier results from the ABS, leading to a U-shaped (rather than increasing) pattern of AI use 

with respect to firm size. One caveat to this difference is that size classes were defined somewhat 

differently in the analyses of the ABS. Nevertheless, the non-monotonicity we observe in the 

BTOS with respect to firm size (specifically the decreasing pattern over the range of smaller firm 

size classes) is still contrary to what can be inferred from relatively comparable size classes in 

previous findings using the ABS. One potential explanation for the relatively high use rates by 

small firms compared to the earlier patterns from the ABS is the accelerating use of generative 

AI particularly among these firms following the introduction of Large Language Models (LLMs) 

and similar applications. Small firms may benefit disproportionately because of a need for 

multitasking by a small number of employees that AI can help with, or because of the relatively 

low cost if cost was previously a barrier to AI use for small firms. The rate of use in the 

Information sector we observe is also much higher than in the earlier studies using ABS, 

indicating an accelerated adoption in this sector. 

There are also private sector surveys on the use of AI. McKinsey and Company’s latest 

annual online global survey of AI use, conducted in April 2023 with about 1,700 (person-level) 

responses worldwide, reports that 55% of respondents used AI in at least one function (but that 

only 33% use AI in more than one function).16 They report that investment in AI is expected to 

16 Since the survey results are reported in terms of percentage of person-level respondents the statistics for 
organizations should be viewed as employment-weighted. The survey is global and the methodology states “To 
adjust for differences in response rates, the data are weighted by the contribution of each respondent’s nation to 
global GDP”. The 55% organization use rate in 2023 is about the same as similar surveys by McKinsey in 2021 and 
2022. Note, however, only 6% of respondents in North America indicate they are using AI regularly in their own 
work, 22% indicate they are using AI regularly for both work and outside of work, and 13% indicate they are using 
AI regularly only for outside of work. The total number of respondents in North America is 392. The survey is also 

16 

 
 
 
increase over the next three years suggesting that adoption is expected to increase over time. 

They also report on reasons for adopting and benefits from adopting. In terms of challenges, they 

report that strategy (for example, setting a clearly defined vision for AI) and models and tools are 

the two biggest reasons cited (p. 10). In considering why the adoption rates differ so 

dramatically, one likely reason is selection bias in terms for firm size and sector. Importantly, a 

large fraction of firms in the U.S. economy (more than 6 million firms) are small firms in 

Construction, Other Services (e.g, drycleaners, hair and nail salons) and Accommodation and 

Food Services.  Our findings highlight low usage rates in these sectors.  

4.  Findings from the AI Supplement 

We next analyze firms’ responses to the AI supplement in BTOS which collected 

information on various aspects of AI use and its effects at the firm level. As in most of the 

analysis above, we combine all 6 periods of the survey over which the supplement was fielded 

and report our findings from the combined sample. 

a.  Use Rates by AI Technology and Application  

Little is known about specific AI technologies and applications being used by businesses, at 

what rate, and how these usage rates will change in the near future.17 The BTOS supplement 

asked firms to identify the AI technologies and applications they utilized in the last six months. 

The response options included separate questions on several core AI technologies (such as 

machine learning, neural networks, natural language processing, deep learning) and business 

applications of these technologies (such as marketing automation, recommendation systems, 

robotics process automation). These response options are neither mutually exclusive nor 

exhaustive (e.g., machine learning is a much broader term that encompasses deep learning and 

not representative in terms of the distribution of employment across sectors (and the national GDP to global GDP 
will not account for this variation). For example, for what they denote as technology, media and telecom they have 
244 respondents representing about 15% of respondents. In the U.S., the Information sector (which includes all of 
these type of firms) accounts for about 2.6% of employment (according to U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Dynamic 
Statistics). The McKinsey survey has about 7.6% of respondents in consumer goods/retail.  The combined Retail, 
Food and Accommodation, and Other Services (which includes the service firms such as drycleaners and automobile 
repair shops) accounts for 26% of US employment. Respondents at Construction firms which have a low AI rate in 
the BTOS don’t appear to be included in the McKinsey survey – they account for about 5.6% of US employment.   
17 Prior work using the 2018 ABS provided some information on the use of five AI-related technologies—see Zolas 
et al. (2020) and McElheran et al. (2024)—but AI was not explicitly mentioned in the survey. 

17 

 
 
 
several others). Firms were asked to choose all options that apply, so that information on the use 

of both the broader and narrower groups of technologies and applications can be collected.  

Table 4a shows the use rates for various technologies and applications (we report results 

for both technologies and applications in the same table). Overall, all technologies and 

applications are used with a low rate across firms in the last 6 months (measured from the period 

of response). Conditional on AI use (i.e., excluding the “none” option), the most commonly used 

technologies and applications are marketing automation (28.4%), virtual agents (21.6%), natural 

language processing (19.3%), text analytics (17.0%), data analytics (17.0%), and speech/voice 

recognition (15.9%). These are followed by an undefined “other” category (15.9%), machine 

learning (13.6%) and large language models (11.4%). The relatively low use rates for the latter 

two may be surprising at first, but respondents may be using these core technologies as part of 

other applications provided in the other response options, and some may not have separately 

reported the use of these two. Furthermore, some respondents may have not been aware of the 

use of these technologies, as they may be embedded in some AI business applications; for 

instance, marketing automation typically uses both machine learning and large language models, 

typically embedded in virtual agents such as ChatGPT that can generate customized marketing 

messages.  

Almost all AI applications and technologies show an increase in their expected use rates 

in the future—with the exception of “other” category. The expected future use rate is the highest 

for marketing automation, with more than one-third of the firms expecting to use some AI 

anticipating future use of this AI application. This is followed by data analytics (29.8%), virtual 

agents (28.2%), and natural language processing (26.6%). Some technologies with low rates of 

current use, such as augmented reality, deep learning, recommendation systems, and decision 

making systems, are expected to have the highest percentage increases in their use rates in the 

future, with nearly a doubling in their current use rates. 

Employment-weighted results in Table 4b, again conditional on use, indicate that data 

analytics is the most prevalent application—32.9% of the employment in AI-using firms are at 

firms using this application. This share is expected to nearly double to 61.1% in the future. 

Robotics process automation, which is used by a relatively small fraction of firms, comes second 

at 29.6% of employment, likely as a result of its use concentrated in large firms in manufacturing 

and other sectors that rely on robotics. 26.2% of employment in AI-using firms is potentially 

18 

 
exposed to machine learning, a rate that is expected to double (50.5%) by mid-to-late 2024. The 

next most common application (after “other”) is virtual agents, used by firms accounting for 

22.7% of employment—a share that is expected to increase to 32.3% by mid-to-late 2024. 

b.  AI–Worker Task Substitution 

To what extent do firms use AI to perform tasks previously carried out by their workers? 

This question is at the center of the theories emphasizing the potential role of AI in substituting 

for worker tasks, which can lead to worker exposure to AI that is predicted to be potentially large 

for particular worker types (see, e.g, Elondou et al. (2023)). The supplement asked firms whether 

they use (or expect to use) AI to perform tasks previously done by employees in producing goods 

or services.  

Figure 6a indicates that, conditional on using AI, 26.6% of the businesses use it, at least in 

part, to replace worker tasks. Still, a large fraction (65.2%) is not using AI for worker task 

replacement. However, the use of AI to replace tasks is expected to grow significantly in the 

future: 34.4% of the firms anticipate they will utilize AI to substitute for worker tasks in the next 

6 months—an increase of nearly 30% from the current rate. 

The supplement also asked about the extent of AI–worker task substitution, measured by 

broad qualitative categories of the number of tasks replaced: small, moderate, or large. The 

extent of such replacement does not appear to be very high, as shown in Table 5a. Nearly 85% of 

businesses who reported using AI to replace any tasks use AI to replace a small number of tasks, 

and only 2.4% use it to replace a large number of tasks. However, the extent of task replacement 

is expected to grow considerably in the near future: 20.8% of businesses indicate expectations 

for future AI use to replace a moderate or high number of tasks, up from 15.4%.  

Employment-weighted results in Figure 6b reveal that 14.9% of the employment in AI-using 

firms is potentially exposed to task replacement, whereas 48.1% of the employment is in firms 

that do not use AI to substitute for tasks.18 Firms expecting to use AI to replace tasks in the next 

18 Both of these shares are lower than the corresponding firm-weighted shares in Figure 6a. These lower shares of 
employment are driven by the “do not know” category: while 8.1% of firms “do not know” whether AI is used for 
worker task replacement, this fraction is much larger (36.9%) on an employment-weighted basis. In other words, the 
“do not know” group is composed of relatively large firms, and this works to make the employment share in the 
“yes” and “no” categories relatively small compared to the firm-weighted shares in Figure 6a. 

19 

 
 
 
six months account for 25.2% of employment of firms anticipating AI use. This fraction 

represents a large increase from the 14.9% of employment in firms that used AI in the last six 

months.  

Turning to the employment-weighted results for the extent of task replacement in Table 5b, 

we observe that 87.0% of employment in AI-using firms is accounted for by firms that use AI to 

replace a small number of tasks. Another 12.3% is in firms using AI to replace a medium number 

of tasks. A very small fraction (0.7%) of employment is in firms using AI to replace a large 

number of tasks. However, the employment share of firms using AI to replace medium to large 

number of tasks is expected to be 19.8% in the next six months, a significant increase from the 

corresponding share (13.0%) of employment in firms that used AI in the last six months. 

c.  Substitution of AI for Equipment/Software Operations 

Next, we turn to the use of AI in relation to the existing equipment/software in a firm. AI has 

the potential to replace or upgrade many existing computer systems and software used in a 

variety of processes in producing goods or services. The supplement asked whether firms use AI 

to perform operations previously performed by existing equipment or software in producing 

goods or services. Figure 6a indicates that, conditional on AI use, 19.6% of firms use AI, at least 

in part, for this purpose—a fraction that is expected to be much larger (33.5%) in the near future. 

On an employment-weighted basis (Figure 6b), 16.9% of workers at AI-using firms are 

employed by firms who reported using AI to replace equipment or software operations. Again, 

this fraction is expected to increase substantially to 34.7% in the next six months.  

Overall, firms’ use of AI to perform equipment or software operations is less common 

than the use to replace worker tasks (26.6% versus 19.6%), but both types of replacement are 

expected to increase substantially in the near future (around 34% each).  

d.  Employment Effects of AI 

The supplement also asked about the net effect of AI use in the last six months on firms’ total 

employment. While AI can replace some workers tasks and types of labor, it can also generate 

new tasks and jobs. The net effect on firm employment depends on the relative strength of these 

two effects.  It also may be that AI is displacing tasks but not workers.   

20 

 
Panel A of Table 6 shows that “no change” in employment was, by far, the most common 

response. An overwhelming fraction (94.6%) of AI-using businesses reported not having 

experienced any net change in their employment in the last six months attributable to AI use. 

Firms that experienced an increase or a decline in employment constitute small fractions of 

firms: 2.8% and 2.6%, respectively. Overall, recent use of AI has not reportedly led to a net 

change in employment for many firms. Nevertheless, employment changes attributable to 

expected future use of AI indicate a changing pattern. The fraction of firms anticipating an 

increase in employment due to future AI use is 6.5%, up from 2.8% in the last six months. 

Similarly, the fraction anticipating a decrease (6.1%) is much higher than the 2.6% reporting a 

decrease in the last six months. These figures represent more than double the fractions pertaining 

to the corresponding cases of employment change in the last six months.  

Employment-weighted results in Panel B of Table 6 reveal that positive or negative 

employment changes due to AI use are applicable to only 2.8% of the employment in firms that 

used AI in the last six months. This fraction is expected to increase to 7.7% in the near future, 

consistent with the corresponding rise in the case of firm-weighted results. However, 

employment-weighted results also indicate a relatively larger share of employment is in firms 

expecting an increase in employment rather than a decrease—as opposed to the corresponding 

figures in the firm-weighted results that show very similar shares for each direction.  

Overall, the results do not indicate that a large fraction of firms has reduced, or will reduce, 

employment due to AI use; though both increases and decreases in employment are expected to 

be more prevalent in the future. At the same time, a slightly larger share of firms indicated 

experiencing (or expecting to experience) an increase rather than a decrease—consistent with the 

prior findings from the 2019 ABS (see Acemoglu et al. (2022)). It appears that while a 

significant fraction of firms uses AI to replace worker tasks, a net employment decline due to AI 

use is a far less common outcome.  

e.  Organizational Changes Associated with AI Use 

Historically, changes in the organization of firms accompanying adoption of new 

technologies have been on many dimensions. Research has shown that such changes in firms’ 

organizational structure include changes in the capital equipment, worker mix, workplace 

practices, how workers interact with each other and with capital equipment, and the training of 

21 

 
workers.19  Finding the right mix of organizational changes requires experimentation as, ex ante, 

it is often unclear what organizational changes are needed for any given new technology.  

The supplement inquired about some of the key adjustments AI users make to use AI—the 

respondents could choose all applicable adjustments. Figure 7a indicates that 50.5% of firms that 

used AI in the last six months did not implement any changes at all in order to use AI. This likely 

reflects that AI use for business purposes is still in early phases where firms are evaluating 

potential organizational changes. A substantial fraction of AI users (20.8%) trained existing staff 

to use AI, while 19.7% developed new workflows. 12.4% reported purchasing cloud services or 

storage, a key complement to AI use. Other changes were less common. Interestingly, only 8.0% 

of firms reported making changes to data collection and data management practices, and only 

7.8% used vendors or consulting services to install or integrate AI. An even smaller fraction of 

firms (2.0%) hired new staff trained in AI. 

Organizational changes appear to be much more prevalent in the case of expected AI use. 

Among firms expecting to use AI in the next six months, training existing staff (41.9%) and 

developing new workflows (37.6%) are still the most common adjustments anticipated—nearly 

double the corresponding shares for AI use in the last six months. Notably, the share of firms 

making changes to data collection or data management practices, using vendors to 

install/integrate AI, purchasing computing power, or hiring staff trained in AI are all also 

expected to increase in view of the anticipated AI use. 

On an employment-weighted basis (Figure 7b), developing new workflows to accommodate 

AI is the most common adjustment (26.6%), followed by training current staff (22.8%). The 

most common adjustments expected in relation to future use are training current staff (49.1%) 

and purchasing cloud services or storage (43.9%), up from 22.8% and 14.0%, respectively, in the 

case of adjustments in the last six months. As in the case of firm-weighted results, all types of 

adjustments appear to be more prevalent in relation to expected AI use compared to current or 

recent use. Only 10.3% of employment at firms expecting to use AI work at firms indicating no 

anticipated adjustments in relation to expected AI use.  

19 See, for example, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000) and Black and Lynch (2021). 

22 

 
 
 
f.  Why Will Some Firms Not Use AI? 

Why is firm-level AI use for producing goods and services relatively low, and why is it likely 

to remain so in the near future? The diffusion of AI is driven by the benefits versus costs of AI, 

and both depend on the types of processes used by the firm and the nature of products and 

services provided. For instance, many small businesses, such as barber shops, nail salons or dry 

cleaners, may not yet see a use for AI, but this can change with growing business applications of 

AI. The supplement asked firms that do not expect to use AI in the future why that might be the 

case. Similar to a question in the 2019 ABS technology module, the question in BTOS was 

designed to uncover some of the key impediments to AI adoption or use.  

Table 7 shows that the most common reason, cited by 80.9% of the businesses not expecting 

to use AI, is the inapplicability of AI to the business—suggesting that most businesses may not 

yet foresee a need for, or a benefit from, AI. As the second most prevalent barrier, 7.3% of firms 

indicated a lack of knowledge on the capabilities of AI. We note, however, that some firms 

lacking such knowledge may have responded as AI being not applicable. Concerns about 

privacy/security and maturity of AI apply to 6.6% of firms not expecting to use AI. Interestingly, 

a considerable fraction of firms did not report the lack of skilled workforce or data, the cost of 

AI, or laws and regulations as impediments to expected future use.  

Overall, the most important barrier, for both recent and expected future use, appears to be the 

limited applicability of AI to most businesses. One potential explanation is the current lack of AI 

applications to a wide variety of business problems. However, this may change with the 

continuing development of AI technologies that can be used in a broader array of business 

processes, as well as in more complex tasks—for example, the advances in generative AI in 

recent years resulted in many new AI applications to business problems. Our findings are also 

similar to the patterns in the 2019 ABS reported in Acemoglu et al. (2022). The most common 

reason for no AI use for the period 2016–2018 was also, by a large margin, the inapplicability of 

AI to a business. AI being too expensive and not mature were the next most common factors 

adversely affecting the use of AI as reported in the 2019 ABS. 

23 

 
 
 
 
5.  AI Use and Firm Performance 

In this section, we leverage questions regarding current and expected future business 

outcomes that are in BTOS for an initial look at the connection between AI use and business 

performance. Specifically, we focus on BTOS questions about current and expected future 

overall performance of the business, as well as current and future employment changes, and 

document how these are related to current and expected future AI use. The survey asks 

respondents to assess the current and expected overall performance of their businesses—without 

specifying the exact criteria for measuring performance. The survey also asks about the net 

employment change with respect to the previous measurement period, and also within the next 

six months.20 We emphasize that the analysis in this section does not seek to identify a causal 

link between AI use and firm performance, but rather to explore whether AI use is associated 

with better firm performance in general. 

As shown in Figure 8a, both the firms that have used AI recently and those expecting to use 

AI in the near future tend to indicate better overall current and future performance. Generally, a 

higher share of these firms is in the “excellent” and “above average” performance categories, 

compared to the firms not using or planning to use AI. For example, 38.9% of AI users indicate 

“excellent” or “above average” current performance, whereas 31.4% of non-users indicate these 

performance levels. Similarly, 48.1% of AI users expect “excellent” or “above average” future 

performance, as opposed to 30.9% of non-users. Similar differences between AI users and non-

users also emerge when employment-weighted shares in Figure 8b are considered. For example, 

for firms currently using AI, 23.1% of employment is in firms indicating an “excellent” overall 

current performance, whereas this fraction is only 13.8% for firms not currently using AI. 

Similarly, for firms expecting to use AI in the next six months, 62.0% of the employment is in 

firms with an “above average” or “excellent” expected future performance, whereas the 

corresponding fraction is 41.2% for firms not expecting to use AI. 

A broadly similar picture emerges for the relationship between AI use and changes in 

employment. Figure A1 in Appendix B indicates that 7.6% of AI users have experienced an 

increase in employment within the last two-weeks of the survey response, whereas this fraction 

20 There are also questions on the changes in other firm-level variables of interest in BTOS, such as revenue, worker 
hours, and demand. We focus on overall performance and employment change for the sake of brevity. 

24 

 
 
is 4.7% for firms not using AI. Furthermore, a relatively large fraction (28.9%) of AI users 

anticipate an increase in employment in the next six months, compared to 15.7% of non-users. 

Similar patterns are observed for the relationship between expected AI use and current 

employment changes. 7.5% percent of future users had a recent increase in employment. This 

fraction is 4.4% for future non-users. At the same time, a large fraction (30.1%) of the firms 

expecting to use AI in the future also expect an increase in employment, but only 14.2% of firms 

that do not anticipate AI use expect a positive employment change.  

Employment-weighted results in Figure A2 confirm these findings. 27.7% of the 

employment in current AI-using firms are in those firms that experience a positive employment 

change in the last two weeks, as opposed to 14.2% of the employment in non-users. 

Interestingly, nearly 60% of the employment in current AI-using firms is accounted for by firms 

that expect future expansion in employment, compared to 37.3% of the employment in non-

users.  

The findings summarized in this section suggest a positive association between current and 

future AI use on the one hand, and current and future firm performance, on the other. Current 

and future employment expansions are also more prevalent in AI-using firms. The positive 

connection between AI use and business performance documented here is generally consistent 

with the previous findings from the ABS 2019. For example, Acemoglu et al. (2022) find that 

AI-using firms tend to be larger and have higher labor productivity. Similarly, exploiting long 

firm histories, Acemoglu et al. (2023) present evidence suggesting that AI-using firms tend to 

grow faster and become larger than non-users even before the accelerated adoption of AI starting 

in the 2010s, and tend to maintain this size advantage after that period. Consistently, Dinlersoz, 

Dogan, and Zolas (2024) find, based on administrative microdata underlying Business Formation 

Statistics, that businesses originating from AI-related business applications over the period 

2004–2021 tend to have higher employment, revenue, and payroll compared to businesses 

originating from other (non–AI-related) applications.  

25 

 
 
 
 
6.  Conclusion and Future Research 

We analyze recently collected high-frequency data on firms’ use of AI in producing goods 

and services based on the Business Trends and Outlook Survey. Several key facts emerge:  

1.  The rate of AI use by firms in producing goods and services is increasing with a use rate 

of about 3.7% in Fall 2023, about 5.4% in February 2024 and expected to rise to about 

6.6% by Fall 2024. The rate of AI use on an employment-weighted basis is higher and 

expected to rise to about 12% by Fall 2024.  The increase from Fall 2023 to expected use 

in Fall 2024 implies rapid growth of AI use by businesses.  

2.  AI use exhibits substantial variation across sectors and states. Notably, the Information 

sector (NAICS 51) is leading in use rate at 18.1% currently and 21.5% in the next six 

months. This contrasts with Construction (NAICS 23) with a current use rate of 1.4% and 

2.2% in the next six months. High use states include those in the west (Colorado, Nevada, 

Utah, California, Arizona, Washington) and some in the east (Florida, Delaware, 

Massachusetts), and the District of Columbia. Low use states include Mississippi, West 

Virginia, Maine, and North Dakota. The high-use states have roughly double the rates at 

the low-use states.  

3.  AI use, while especially high in the largest firms, has a U-shaped pattern with respect to 

firm size. AI use monotonically declines with firm age on a firm-weighted basis and has a 

U-shaped relationship on an employment-weighted basis, for current and future use. 

These patterns together suggest that some AI applications (e.g., Generative AI) may be 

general purpose technologies that do not involve large fixed costs making it more 

attractive to young and small firms.   

4.  While AI use appears to be generally persistent at the firm level, about one in seven users 

of AI do not expect to continue to use AI in the near future, potentially indicating some 

degree of ongoing experimentation or temporary use that may result in de-adoption.  

5.  Marketing automation, virtual agents, natural language processing, and data/text analytics 

appear to be the most widely used AI applications by businesses, and their use will grow 

26 

 
in the near future.  On an employment-weighted basis, data analytics and robotics 

automation are the dominant types of use. 

6.  While many businesses use AI to replace worker tasks and existing equipment/software, 

there is little evidence that AI use is associated with a decline in firm employment. In 

fact, an increase in employment as a result of AI use is more common than a decrease. 

While both types of change (increase and decrease) are expected to become more 

common in the near future, the incidences of these changes will remain low relative to 

that of no change. Similarly, a substantial fraction of the firms that use AI to replace 

worker tasks uses it to replace only a small number of worker tasks—a pattern that is 

expected to remain largely the same in the near future. 

7.  AI-using businesses generally perform better than non-users and expect to do so in the 

future. They also more commonly experience employment expansions than contractions 

compared to non-users. The overall better performance of AI-using businesses is a fact 

that has repeatedly emerged from the analysis of other data, including data from the ABS 

and the BFS. 

8.  The most common organizational changes to accommodate AI are training existing 

workers, developing new workflows, purchasing cloud services/storage, and changing 

data management/collection practices.  

9.  The predominant reason why businesses do not expect to use AI in the near future is the 

inapplicability of the technology to a business. Lack of knowledge on the capabilities of 

AI is the second—but far less common—reason.  

These findings offer a rich snapshot of the patterns of recent and future AI use by firms. By 

now, a set of stylized facts about AI use by firms has emerged from surveys (ABS, BTOS) and 

administrative data (BFS). While the use of AI in producing goods and services remains low, it is 

growing, and associated with better firm performance overall, but not leading to declines in firm 

employment in the present period and near future.  Whether these patterns will change as the 

diffusion of AI progresses remains to be seen. While the BTOS AI supplement data collection 

has ended, the core AI questions will continue to be fielded until August 2024. The accumulating 

27 

 
large data on AI use by firms will remain a valuable resource for a robust analysis of the 

continuing diffusion of AI and its effects on the economy. 

The BTOS real-time snapshot can also be integrated at the micro level with other Census 

business survey and administrative data. These data can provide more quantitative information 

on output, employment, and capital. Future research can use such integrated data to explore firm 

dynamics in terms of output, employment, productivity and capital investment both prior to and 

subsequent to the adoption of AI. Such analysis has great promise for studying the causal 

connection between AI use and firm performance, and the effects of growing AI use on 

aggregate economic activity and productivity. 

Our findings are consistent with the view that, although AI has been under development for 

some time with rapid advances in recent years, AI use by businesses remains in relatively early 

days (see Chapter 7 of the Economic Report of President (2024) and Agrawal, Gans and 

Goldfarb (2022) for further discussion of the factors underlying current and future adoption of 

AI).  Many businesses do not yet see AI as being relevant for their business activity or do not yet 

have the knowledge to implement AI in their business activity. Training and complementary 

investments in changing business organization in various ways are common activities of users of 

current and future users AI so non-users face these challenges in adopting AI.    

We are likely tracking significant use of AI for business purposes. In some types of 

businesses, this significant use is already large. Moreover, the growth rate over our sample 

period combined with expected future growth suggests AI use will become more widespread 

over time. Given this anticipated growth and the potential impact of AI on business activity 

including workers, it will remain important to track AI use for business purposes and its impact 

in real time.   

28 

 
 
 
References 

Acemoglu, Daron, Gary Anderson, David Beede, Catherine Buffington, Eric Childress, Emin 

Dinlersoz, Lucia Foster, Nathan Goldschlag, John Haltiwanger, Zachary Kroff, Pascual 
Restrepo, and Nikolas Zolas (2023). “Advanced Technology Adoption: Selection or 
Causal Effects?,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 113: 210–214. 

Acemoglu, Daron, Gary Anderson, David Beede, Catherine Buffington, Eric Childress, Emin 

Dinlersoz, Lucia Foster, Nathan Goldschlag, John Haltiwanger, Zachary Kroff, Pascual 
Restrepo, and Nikolas Zolas (2022). “Technology, Firms, and Workers: Evidence from 
the 2019 Annual Business Survey,” NBER Working Paper 30659, November. 

Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb (2022). Power and Prediction:  The Disruptive 

Economics of Artificial Intelligence, Harvard Business Review Press. 

Babina, Tania, Anastassia Fedyk, Alex He, and James Hodson (2024). “Artificial Intelligence, 
Firm Growth, and Product Innovation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 151, 103745. 

Baily, Martin Neil, Erik Brynjolfsson, Anton Korinek (2023). “Machines of Mind: The Case for 

an AI-Powered Productivity Boom,” Brookings Institution Research. 
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/machines-of-mind-the-case-for-an-ai-powered-
productivity-boom/. 

Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch (2001). “How To Compete: The Impact Of Workplace 

Practices And Information Technology On Productivity,” The Review of Economics and 
Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 83(3), pages 434-445, August. 

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M. Hitt (2000). "Beyond Computation: Information Technology, 
Organizational Transformation and Business Performance," Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, American Economic Association, vol. 14(4), pages 23-48, Fall. 

Buffington, Catherine, Lucia Foster, and Colin Shevlin (2023). “Measuring Business Trends and 

Outlook through a New Survey,” with Catherine Buffington and Colin Shevlin. AEA 
Papers and Proceedings, 113: 140–144. https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20231051. 

Chow, Melissa C., Teresa C. Fort, Christopher Goetz, Nathan Goldschlag, James Lawrence, 
Elisabeth Ruth Perlman, Martha Stinson, and T. Kirk White (2021). “Redesigning the 
Longitudinal Business Database” National Bureau of Economic Research Working paper 
No. w28839. 

Decker, Ryan and John Haltiwanger (2024). “Surging Business Formation:  Causes and 

Consequences,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2023. 

Dinlersoz, Emin, Can Dogan, and Nikolas Zolas (2024). “Starting Up AI,” Center for Economic 

Studies Working Paper CES-24-09, U.S. Census Bureau. 

Economic Report of the President (2024).  https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/uploads/2024/03/ERP-2024.pdf. 

Eloundou, Tyna, Sam Manning, Pamela Mishkin, and Daniel Rock (2023). “GPTs are GPTs: An 

Early Look at the Labor Market Impact Potential of Large Language Models,” Working 
Paper, OpenAI. 

29 

 
 
Jarmin, Ron S. and Javier Miranda (2002). The Longitudinal Business Database. Center for 

Economic Studies Working Paper 02-17, U.S. Census Bureau. 

Gordon, Robert (2024). “The Future of  U.S. Productivity Growth: A Skeptical View,” presented 

at Symposium: U.S. Productivity Growth – Looking Ahead at the NY Federal Reserve 
Bank, February 16, 2024. Available at: U.S. Productivity Growth: Looking Ahead – 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (newyorkfed.org). 

McElheran, Kristina,  J. Frank Li, Erik Brynjolfsson, Zachary Kroff, Emin Dinlersoz, Lucia 

Foster, and Nikolas Zolas (2024). “AI Adoption in America: Who, What, and Where,” 
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2024:1-41. 

McKinsey and Company (2023). “The State of AI in 2023: Generative AI’s Breakout Year,” the-

state-of-ai-in-2023-generative-ais-breakout-year_vf.pdf (mckinsey.com) 

Miric, Milan, Nan Jia, and Kenneth G. Huang (2023). “Using Supervised Machine Learning for 
Large-Scale Classification in Management Research: The Case of Identifying Artificial 
Intelligence Patents,” Strategic Management Journal, 44(2): 491-519. 

Zolas, Nikolas, Zachary Kroff, Erik Brynjolfsson, Kristina McElheran, David Beede, Catherine 

Buffington, Nathan Goldschlag, Lucia Foster, and Emin Dinlersoz (2020). “Advanced 
Technologies Adoption and Use by U.S. Firms: Evidence from the Annual Business 
Survey,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 28290. 

30 

 
 
 
Table 1. Contingency Tables for Current vs. Expected AI Use (Firm-weighted) 

Panel A: Unconditional Shares 

Expected AI Use 

Yes 

3.4% 
2.8% 

0.3% 

No 

0.7% 
67.4% 

Don't 
Know 
0.9% 
14.0% 

2.5% 

8.0% 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

Panel B: Conditional on Current AI Use (rows) 
Expected AI Use 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

Yes 

No 

67.9% 
3.3% 

14.5% 
80.0% 

Don't 
Know 
17.6% 
16.7% 

3.1% 

23.0% 

73.9% 

Panel C: Conditional on Expected AI Use (columns) 

Expected AI Use 

Yes 

No 

52.0% 
42.8% 

1.0% 
95.5% 

Don't 
Know 
3.8% 
61.3% 

5.2% 

3.5% 

34.9% 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI 
in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a 
business’s response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. Firm-
weighted shares should be interpreted as the share of firms with a given combination of current and expected AI use. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Contingency Tables for Current vs. Expected AI Use (Emp.-weighted) 

Panel A: Unconditional Shares 

Expected AI Use 

Yes 

4.8% 
4.3% 

2.2% 

No 

0.7% 
50.8% 

Don't 
Know 
1.7% 
14.7% 

2.1% 

18.8% 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

Panel B: Conditional on Current AI Use (rows) 
Expected AI Use 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

Yes 

No 

66.2% 
6.1% 

9.6% 
72.9% 

Don't 
Know 
24.2% 
21.0% 

9.6% 

8.9% 

81.5% 

Panel C: Conditional on Expected AI Use (columns) 

Expected AI Use 

Yes 

No 

Don't 
Know 
5.0% 
41.7% 

1.3% 
94.9% 

3.8% 

53.4% 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

42.5% 
38.0% 

19.5% 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI 
in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a 
business’s response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. 
Employment-weighted shares should be interpreted as the share of employment working at firms with a given 
combination of current and expected AI use. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Contingency Table for Average Number of Employees by Current vs. Expected AI 
Use (Firm-weighted) 

Expected AI Use 

Current 
AI Use 

Yes 
No 
Don't 
Know 

Yes 

33 
36 

150 

Average 

40 

No 

22 
18 

19 

18 

Don't 
Know 
46 
24 

55 

36 

Average 

34 
19 

49 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI 
in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a 
business’s response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. Firm-
weighted averages should be interpreted as the average size of firms with a given combination of current and 
expected AI use. 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4a. AI Technologies or Applications Used by Businesses (Firm-weighted) 

AI Type/Application 

Last 6 months 
(Overall Share) 

Last 6 months 
(Share of Users) 

Marketing automation using AI 
Virtual agents or chat bots 
Natural language processing 
Text analytics using AI 
Data analytics using AI 
Other 
Speech/voice recognition using AI 
Machine learning 
Large language models 
Recommendation systems based on AI 
Image/pattern recognition 
Decision making systems based on AI 
Machine/computer vision 
Deep learning 
Robotics process automation 
Biometrics 
Neural networks 
Augmented reality 
None 

2.5% 
1.9% 
1.7% 
1.5% 
1.5% 
1.4% 
1.4% 
1.2% 
1.0% 
0.8% 
0.7% 
0.5% 
0.5% 
0.3% 
0.3% 
0.3% 
0.2% 
0.1% 
91.2% 

28.4% 
21.6% 
19.3% 
17.0% 
17.0% 
15.9% 
15.9% 
13.6% 
11.4% 
9.1% 
8.0% 
5.7% 
5.7% 
3.4% 
3.4% 
3.4% 
2.3% 
1.1% 
- 

Next 6 months 
(Share of 
Expected Users) 
36.5% 
28.2% 
26.6% 
23.0% 
29.8% 
12.4% 
22.2% 
22.1% 
15.5% 
16.8% 
13.3% 
14.1% 
7.0% 
7.3% 
5.2% 
3.8% 
3.7% 
3.3% 
- 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Firm-weighted “overall” shares represent the share of firms using a 
given application of AI in producing goods or services during the six months prior to data collection. Shares of 
“users” represents the same share conditional on not responding “None.” Shares of “expected users” represent the 
share of firms with expectations to use a given application of AI in producing goods or services during the six 
months following data collection. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4b. AI Technologies or Applications Used by Businesses (Emp.-weighted) 

AI Type/Application 

Last 6 months 
(Overall Share) 

Last 6 months 
(Share of Users) 

Data analytics using AI 
Robotics process automation 
Machine learning 
Other 
Virtual agents or chat bots 
Text analytics using AI 
Speech/voice recognition using AI 
Machine/computer vision 
Marketing automation using AI 
Image/pattern recognition 
Natural language processing 
Biometrics 
Recommendation systems based on AI 
Decision making systems based on AI 
Deep learning 
Large language models 
Augmented reality 
Neural networks 
None 

6.6% 
5.9% 
5.2% 
4.6% 
4.6% 
2.8% 
2.7% 
2.4% 
2.3% 
1.6% 
1.3% 
1.2% 
1.1% 
1.1% 
0.7% 
0.6% 
0.2% 
0.1% 
80.0% 

32.9% 
29.6% 
26.2% 
23.1% 
22.7% 
14.1% 
13.6% 
12.0% 
11.4% 
7.8% 
6.6% 
6.1% 
5.7% 
5.6% 
3.4% 
3.1% 
1.0% 
0.4% 
- 

Next 6 months 
(Share of 
Expected Users) 
61.1% 
31.5% 
50.5% 
6.5% 
32.3% 
16.0% 
28.1% 
8.9% 
17.6% 
10.8% 
17.1% 
7.3% 
12.4% 
12.0% 
5.4% 
6.1% 
1.5% 
1.0% 
- 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Employment-weighted “overall” shares represent the share of 
employment working at firms who reported using each application of AI in producing goods or services during the 
six months prior to data collection. Shares of “users” represents the same share conditional on not responding 
“None.” Shares of “expected users” represent the share of employment working at firms who reported expectations 
to use each application of AI in producing goods or services during the six months following data collection. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Number of Tasks Replaced by AI 

Panel A: Firm-weighted 

Tasks Replaced by AI 

Last 6 months 

Small number 
Moderate number 
Large number 
Panel B: Emp.-weighted 

84.6% 
13.0% 
2.4% 

Tasks Replaced by AI 

Last 6 months 

Small number 
Moderate number 
Large number 

87.0% 
12.3% 
0.7% 

Next 6 months 
(Expected) 
79.2% 
17.7% 
3.1% 

Next 6 months 
(Expected) 
80.3% 
18.0% 
1.8% 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Firm-weighted shares represent the share of firms reporting each 
qualitative measure of tasks replaced by AI during the six months prior to data collection or expected to be replaced 
by AI in the six months following data collection. Employment-weighted shares represent the share of employment 
working at said firms. Response to this question is conditional on a firm responding “yes” to using AI (or expecting 
to use AI) to perform tasks previously done by employees in producing goods or services. 

Table 6. Effects of AI on Firm Employment 

Panel A: Firm-weighted 

Change in Employment  Last 6 months 

Increase 
Decrease 
No change 
Panel B: Emp.-weighted 

2.8% 
2.6% 
94.6% 

Change in Employment  Last 6 months 

Increase 
Decrease 
No change 

1.6% 
1.2% 
97.2% 

Next 6 months 
(Expected) 
6.5% 
6.1% 
87.4% 

Next 6 months 
(Expected) 
4.4% 
3.3% 
92.3% 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Firm-weighted shares represent the share of firms reporting each 
direction of change in total employment due to AI use during the six months prior to data collection or expected 
change in total employment due to AI use in the six months following data collection. Employment-weighted shares 
represent the share of employment working at said firms. Response to this question is conditional on a firm reporting 
use or expected use of an AI application in producing goods or services. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 7. Reasons for Not Planning to Use AI 

Reason 
AI is not applicable to this business 
Lack of knowledge on the capabilities of AI 
Concerns about privacy/security 
AI is not a mature enough technology yet 
Other 
Too expensive 
Lack of skilled workforce 
Concerns about bias 
Lack of required data 
Laws and regulations prevent or restrict use of AI 
Previous or current use of AI did not meet expectations 

Firm-weighted  Emp.- weighted 

80.9% 
7.3% 
6.6% 
6.1% 
4.5% 
4.1% 
2.9% 
2.8% 
2.2% 
1.2% 
0.9% 

76.2% 
8.8% 
8.9% 
8.1% 
5.8% 
4.6% 
3.6% 
2.6% 
2.4% 
2.5% 
0.5% 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 
3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Firm-weighted shares represent the share of firms reporting each 
reason for not planning to use AI in producing goods or services during the six months following data collection. 
Employment-weighted shares represent the share of employment working at said firms. Response to this question is 
conditional on a firm responding “no” to expecting to use AI in producing goods or services during the six months 
following data collection. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Trends in Current and Expected AI Use 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: First and last reference periods in the graph ended on September 10, 2023 and February 11, 2024, 
respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services 
during the two-week period ending with the date indicated on the graph. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business 
responding “yes” to thinking it will be using AI during the six months following the date indicated on the graph. 
Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as the share of U.S. firms using or expecting to use AI. Employment-
weighted shares should be interpreted as the share of U.S. employment working at firms who use or expect to use 
AI. Trend lines shown on the graph are based on simple (OLS) linear regression. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2a. Current and Expected AI Use by Sector (Firm-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” 
refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business 
responding “yes” to thinking it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each sector, the share of 
firms using or expecting to use AI. Sector codes: XX (firms with establishments in multiple sectors); 11 (Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting); 21 (Mining, Quarrying, and 
Oil and Gas Extraction); 22 (Utilities); 23 (Construction); 31–33 (Manufacturing); 42 (Wholesale Trade); 44–45 (Retail Trade); 48–49 (Transportation and Warehousing); 51 
(Information); 52 (Finance and Insurance); 53 (Real Estate and Rental and Leasing); 54 (Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services); 55 (Management of Companies and 
Enterprises); 56 (Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services); 61 (Educational Services); 62 (Health Care and Social Assistance);  71 (Arts, 
Entertainment, and Recreation); 72 (Accommodation and Food Services); 81 (Other Services—except Public Administration). Current AI use for Utilities (NAICS 22) has been 
suppressed for confidentiality reasons. 

39 

 
 
Figure 2b. Current and Expected AI Use by Sector (Employment-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” 
refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business 
responding “yes” to thinking it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. Employment-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each sector, the 
share of employment working at firms who use or expect to use AI. Sector codes: XX (firms with establishments in multiple sectors); 11 (Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and 
Hunting); 21 (Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction); 22 (Utilities); 23 (Construction); 31–33 (Manufacturing); 42 (Wholesale Trade); 44–45 (Retail Trade); 48–49 
(Transportation and Warehousing); 51 (Information); 52 (Finance and Insurance); 53 (Real Estate and Rental and Leasing); 54 (Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services); 
55 (Management of Companies and Enterprises); 56 (Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services); 61 (Educational Services); 62 (Health Care 
and Social Assistance);  71 (Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation); 72 (Accommodation and Food Services); 81 (Other Services—except Public Administration). Current AI use for 
Utilities (NAICS 22) has been suppressed for confidentiality reasons.

40 

 
Figure 3a. Current and Expected AI Use by State (Firm-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current 
AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to 
a business responding “yes” to thinking it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each 
state, the share of firms using or expecting to use AI. State “XX” refers to the set of firms with establishments in multiple states. Includes the District of Columbia (DC) 
and Puerto Rico (PR). 

41 

 
 
Figure 3b. Current and Expected AI Use by State (Employment-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current 
AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to 
a business responding “yes” to thinking it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. Employment-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within 
each state, the share of employment working at firms who use or expect to use AI. State “XX” refers to the set of firms with establishments in multiple states. Includes the 
District of Columbia (DC) and Puerto Rico (PR). 

42 

 
 
Figure 3c. Current AI Use by State (Firm-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services 
during the two-week period prior to data collection. Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each state, the share of 
firms using or expecting to use AI. State “XX” refers to the set of firms with establishments in multiple states. Includes the District of 
Columbia (DC) and Puerto Rico (PR). 

43 

 
 
 
Figure 4a. Current and Expected AI Use by Firm Size (Firm-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services 
during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to thinking it will be 
using AI during the six months following data collection. Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each size class, the 
share of firms using or expecting to use AI. 

Figure 4b. Current and Expected AI Use by Firm Size (Employment-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services 
during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to thinking it will be 
using AI during the six months following data collection. Employment-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each size 
class, the share of employment working at firms who use or expect to use AI. 

44 

 
  
 
Figure 5a. Current and Expected AI Use by Firm Age (Firm-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services 
during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to thinking it will be 
using AI during the six months following data collection. Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each age class, the 
share of firms using or expecting to use AI. 

Figure 5b. Current and Expected AI Use by Firm Age (Employment-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to using AI in producing goods or services 
during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business responding “yes” to thinking it will be 
using AI during the six months following data collection. Employment-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each age 
class, the share of employment working at firms who use or expect to use AI. 

45 

 
 
 
Figure 6a. AI Replacing Worker Tasks and Equipment Operations (Firm-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. Firm-weighted shares represent the share of firms reporting whether they used AI during the six 
months prior to data collection or expect to use AI in the six months following data collection to perform tasks or operations 
previously performed by employees or equipment/software, respectively. Response to this question is conditional on a firm reporting 
use or expected use of an AI application in producing goods or services. 

Figure 6b. AI Replacing Worker Tasks and Equipment Operations (Emp.-weighted)

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and 
February 11, 2024, respectively. Employment-weighted shares represent the share of employment working at firms reporting whether 
they used AI during the six months prior to data collection or expect to use AI in the six months following data collection to perform 
tasks or operations previously performed by employees or equipment/software, respectively. Response to this question is conditional 
on a firm reporting use or expected use of an AI application in producing goods or services. 

46 

 
 
 
Figure 7a. Changes Made by Firms to Use AI (Firm-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Firm-weighted 
shares represent the share of firms reporting changes made during the six months prior to data collection or expected to be made in the six months following data collection in 
order to use AI. Response to this question is conditional on a firm reporting use or expected use of an AI application in producing goods or services. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7b. Changes Made by Firms to Use AI (Emp.-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. Emp.-weighted 
shares represent the share of employment working at firms reporting changes made during the six months prior to data collection or expected to be made in the six months 
following data collection in order to use AI. Response to this question is conditional on a firm reporting use or expected use of an AI application in producing goods or services. 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8a. AI Use and Business Performance (Firm-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” 
refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business’s 
response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. “Current performance” refers to a business’s response to how it would describe its 
current performance. “Expected performance” refers to a business’s response to how it thinks it will describe its performance six months following data collection. Firm-weighted 
shares should be interpreted as, within each response to current or expected AI use, the share of firms reporting each qualitative measure of current or expected performance. In 
other words, bars of a given color sum to 100%. 

49 

 
 
 
 
Figure 8b. AI Use and Business Performance (Emp.-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” 
refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business’s 
response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. “Current performance” refers to a business’s response to how it would describe its 
current performance. “Expected performance” refers to a business’s response to how it thinks it will describe its performance six months following data collection. Employment-
weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each response to current or expected AI use, the share of employment working at firms who reported each qualitative measure of 
current or expected performance. In other words, bars of a given color sum to 100%.

50 

 
 
Appendix A. BTOS Core Content, Survey Year 2 

1. Is __________________ the Employer Identification Number (EIN) used on this business’s 
latest Internal Revenue Service Form 941, Employer's Federal Quarterly Tax Return? 
• Yes 
• No 
If no, please provide EIN: 

2. Overall, how would you describe this business’s current performance? Please include all 
domestic operations of this consolidated business, including all locations, subsidiaries, and 
divisions. 
• Excellent 
• Above average 
• Average 
• Below average 
• Poor 

3.. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did this business’s operating revenues/sales/receipts 
change? Please compare this two week period to the two weeks prior. Estimates are acceptable. 
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

4. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did this business’s number of paid employees change?  
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

5. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did the total number of hours worked by this business’s 
paid employees change?  
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

6. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, did this business use Artificial Intelligence in producing 
goods or services? (e.g., machine learning, natural language processing, virtual agents, voice 
recognition, etc.) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Do not know 

51 

 
 
 
7. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, did this business do any of the following?  
Select all that apply. 
• Open a new location 
• Open a previously closed location  
• Temporarily close a location  
• Permanently close a location  
• None of the above  

8. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did the time it takes for this business to receive 
deliveries from suppliers change? 
• Increased 
• Decreased 
• No change 
• Not applicable 

9. How would you describe this business’s current inventories? 
• Larger than optimal 
• Optimal 
• Smaller than optimal 
• Not applicable 

10. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did demand for this business’s goods or services 
change?  
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

11. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did the prices this business charges for its own goods 
or services change?  
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

12. Between MMM DD – MMM DD, how did the prices this business pays for goods or services 
change?  
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

13. In the last six months, in what ways did changes to interest rates negatively impact this 
business? Select all that apply. 
• Decreased profitability 
• Inability to service debt 
• Inability to refinance existing loans 
• Inability to invest in this business 
• Not applicable 

52 

 
 
 
14. In the last six months, did this business experience any monetary losses due to an extreme 
weather event (for example, hurricane, flood, drought, or heat wave)? 
• Yes 
• No 

15.Six months from now, how do you think you will describe this business’s performance? 
• Excellent 
• Above average 
• Average 
• Below average 
• Poor 

16. Six months from now, how do you think this business’s number of paid employees will have 
changed? 
• Increased  
• Decreased  
• No change 

17. Six months from now, how do you think the total number of hours worked by this business’s 
paid employees will have changed?  
• Increased  
• Decreased 
• No change 

18. Six months from now, how do you think the time it takes for this business to receive deliveries 
from suppliers will have changed? 
• Increased 
• Decreased 
• No change  
• Not applicable 

19. Six months from now, how do you think you will describe this business’s inventories? 
• Larger than optimal 
• Optimal 
• Smaller than optimal 
• Not applicable 

20. Six months from now, how do you think demand for this business’s goods or services will 
have changed?  
• Increased  
• Decreased 
• No change 

21. Six months from now, how do you think the prices this business charges for its own goods or 
services will have changed?  
• Increased  
• Decreased 
• No change 

53 

 
 
22. Six months from now, how do you think the prices this business pays for goods or services 
will have changed?  
• Increased  
• Decreased 
• No change 

23.During the next six months, do you think this business will do any of the following?  
Select all that apply. 
• Open a new location  
• Open a previously closed location  
• Temporarily close a location  
• Permanently close a location 
• None of the above  

24. During the next six months, do you think this business will be using Artificial Intelligence in 
producing goods or services? (e.g., machine learning, natural language processing, virtual agents, 
voice recognition, etc.) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Do not know 

25. Remarks 
Contact Info (name/ title) 
Email 

54 

 
 
Appendix B. BTOS AI Supplement 

24. In the last six months, what types or applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) did this 
business use in producing goods or services? 
Select all that apply. 

• Machine learning 
• Natural language processing 
• Virtual agents or chat bots 
• Speech/voice recognition using AI 
• Recommendation systems based on AI 
• Large language models 
• Text analytics using AI 
• Data analytics using AI 
• Neural networks 
• Augmented reality 
• Decision making systems based on AI 
• Deep learning 
• Image/pattern recognition 
• Machine/computer vision 
• Robotics process automation 
• Biometrics 
• Marketing automation using AI 
• Other 
• None 

If the answer to 24 is anything other than “None”, then ask 25-29 below: 

25. In the last six months, did this business use Artificial Intelligence to perform tasks previously 
done by employees in producing goods or services? 
a. Yes 
b. No  
c. Do not know 

If yes to 25, ask 26: 

26. In the last six months, how many tasks previously done by employees were instead performed 
by Artificial Intelligence? 
• A small number 
• A moderate number 
• A large number 

27. In the last six months, did this business use Artificial Intelligence to perform operations 
previously performed by existing equipment or software in producing goods or services? 
• Yes 
• No  
• Do not know 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. In the last six months, how did the use of Artificial Intelligence affect this business’s total 
employment? 
• Increased 
• Decreased 
• Did not change 

29. In the last six months, to use Artificial Intelligence (AI), what changes did this business make? 
Select all that apply. 

• Trained current staff to use AI 
• Hired staff trained in AI 
• Purchased computing power or specialized equipment 
• Purchased cloud services or cloud storage 
• Changed data collection or data management practices 
• Developed new workflows 
• Used vendors or consulting services to install or integrate AI 
• Other 
• None 

30. During the next six months, do you think this business will be using Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
in producing goods or services? (Examples of AI: machine learning, natural language processing, 
virtual agents, voice recognition, etc.) 
• Yes 
• No 
• Do not know 

If yes to 30, then ask 31-36 below: 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31. During the next six months, what types or applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) do you 
think this business will use in producing goods or services? 

Select all that apply. 

• Machine learning 
• Natural language processing 
• Virtual agents or chat bots 
• Speech/voice recognition using AI 
• Recommendation systems based on AI 
• Large language models 
• Text analytics using AI 
• Data analytics using AI 
• Neural networks 
• Augmented reality 
• Decision making systems based on AI 
• Deep learning 
• Image/pattern recognition 
• Machine/computer vision 
• Robotics process automation 
• Biometrics 
• Marketing automation using AI 
• Other 

32. During the next six months, do you think this business will use Artificial Intelligence to perform 
tasks currently done by employees in producing goods or services? 
• Yes 
• No  
• Do not know 

33.  During  the  next  six  months,  how  many  tasks  currently  done  by  employees  will  instead  be 
performed by Artificial Intelligence? 
• A small number 
• A moderate number 
• A large number 

34. During the next six months, do you think this business will use Artificial Intelligence to 
perform operations currently performed by existing equipment and software in producing goods or 
services? 
• Yes 
• No  
• Do not know 

35. During the next six months, how do you think the use of Artificial Intelligence will affect this 
business’s total employment? 
• Increase 
• Decrease 
• Will not change 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
36. During the next six months, to use Artificial Intelligence, what changes do you think this 
business will make? 
Select all that apply. 

• Train current staff to use AI 
• Hire staff trained in AI 
• Purchase computing power or specialized equipment 
• Purchase cloud services or cloud storage 
• Change data collection or data management practices 
• Develop new workflows 
• Use vendors or consulting services to install or integrate AI 
• Other 
• None 

If no to 30, ask 37: 

37. Why does this business not plan to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) during the next six months 
in producing goods or services? 
Select all that apply. 

• Too expensive 
• AI is not a mature enough technology yet 
• Lack of knowledge on the capabilities of AI 
• Concerns about privacy/security 
• Concerns about bias 
• Lack of skilled workforce 
• Lack of required data 
• Laws and regulations prevent or restrict use of AI 
• Previous or current use of AI did not meet expectations 
• Other 
• AI is not applicable to this business 

58 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C. Additional Figures 

Figure A1. Employment Changes and AI Use (Firm-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” 
refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business’s 
response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. “Current change in paid employees” refers to a business’s response to how its 
number of paid employees changed during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected change in paid employees” refers to a business’s response to how it thinks its 
number of paid employees will have changed six months following data collection. Firm-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each response to current or expected AI 
use, the share of firms reporting each current or expected direction of change in paid employees. In other words, bars of a given color sum to 100%. 

59 

 
 
 
 
Figure A2. Employment Changes and AI Use (Emp.-weighted) 

Source: Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) 
Notes: Respondents pooled across 6 two-week panels, with the first and last reference periods ending on December 3, 2023 and February 11, 2024, respectively. “Current AI Use” 
refers to a business’s response to whether it used AI in producing goods or services during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected AI Use” refers to a business’s 
response to whether it thinks it will be using AI during the six months following data collection. “Current change in paid employees” refers to a business’s response to how its 
number of paid employees changed during the two-week period prior to data collection. “Expected change in paid employees” refers to a business’s response to how it thinks its 
number of paid employees will have changed six months following data collection. Emp.-weighted shares should be interpreted as, within each response to current or expected AI 
use, the share of employment working at firms who reported each current or expected direction of change in paid employees. In other words, bars of a given color sum to 100%. 

60 

 
 
